Okay, back up just a little bit and let's just change directions.
Alright.
There must be a bit of the actress in order to do the things on stage that you do.
Of course.
But actually, I think there's a bit of actress or actor in almost everyone who's into the
fandom scene at all and even people who aren't.
It's just a matter of whether we can actually do something with it or not.
A lot of people just assume, well, that'll never happen.
I'll never get to do anything with it and they forget about that part of their personality.
I'm a little more stubborn.
I intend to do it professionally eventually and to some extent I'm doing that now with
my performing as a singer and dancer with the singing telegram companies and as a model
and so forth.
I've been in two science fiction movies as an extra, Loebens Run and Laid of Heaven,
which both were a lot of fun.
But it doesn't take an actor or an actress to do these kind of things and I've seen a
lot of really wonderful skits and costumes and performances pulled off by people who
had never even considered the idea of being professional actors or actresses.
They just want to make it real.
That's all acting ever was, was just trying to make something real and recreate something.
It's just that what we do is a little different than your typical stage play.
But it should be no less entertaining and we're trying to create it so that it's no
less entertaining.
When you got into this, were there any resources that you drew upon or to learn how to do what
you're doing now?
I still don't know what I'm doing now.
I've learned a lot from other people and from lots of trial and error, mostly trial
and error.
I discovered fabric glue when I was in desperation and it works wonderfully on all kinds of things.
When I started costuming, I really didn't know anything about sewing at all.
The idea of making clothes was the farthest thing from my mind and it just happened that
I needed a costume and I had to figure out how to create this thing that you couldn't
possibly buy in a store by its very nature.
The first costumes were very much trial and error.
But since then I've learned a lot of shortcuts, shortcuts that an average seamstress would
probably never use because they learned all the rules and I didn't.
I try to pass on those shortcuts and a lot of the major conventions, they have workshops
where they discuss costuming and shortcuts that other people have find and stage techniques
and there are books and magazines out that cover costuming and make up and easy ways to
do all these things.
And eventually I did break down and take a class in costuming at my university because
as a drama major I had to but by that time I pretty well had figured most of it out for
myself.
But there's some wonderful books you can get at the local library which can tell you how
to do almost anything you want to do.
This must be kind of infectious because you said you had a group that did this and you've
had people that help you so you kind of get together with other people and they think
this is nice and so you've got another convert to the...
Oh yes, we don't have anyone who's ever met or joined our group that hasn't immediately
ended up in a costume.
Sometimes under protest the first time but they always end up under a costume and then
they always want more and more costumes and the next thing you know we've got a whole
new set of costumers.
When we went to Boston we took five people in four different costume skits.
These five people I was the only one who had ever been to a world com before.
Most of them had never even been to a major convention before.
All they knew was they wanted to do the masquerade.
They loved science fiction and fantasy and fandom and they wanted to do the masquerade
and they had a lot of creativity and they were willing to listen to suggestions and
we all worked together and we came away with four awards.
People who nobody had ever heard of before, we went up there to the world con and won
four of the top awards.
Best presentation overall, first runner up for best presentation, Star Wars special award
prize and first runner up for best fantasy.
And immediately everyone wanted to know about Texas.
They had never realized there were so many costumers in Texas and these were all basically
newbies and none of the costumes were extremely complex but the ideas around the costumes
were good and good enough to catch the imagination of the audience and that's where it's at is
the idea.
If you've got an idea it doesn't matter if you're a virtuoso at the seamstress stuff
as long as the idea is something that will catch and hold an audience.
Use the term newbies.
Newbies.
She's been using a few fan, the fan vocabulary.
Yeah that's why.
Somebody just make a fan vocabulary dictionary.
There is one I'm sure.
I've seen one anyway.
Yeah.
Let's talk a bit about fandom.
We're gonna have to give a, you have spoken to it on a couple of, let's stop the tape.
There are actually several different level of fans.
There are new fan which are people who just discovered that oh you mean there's somebody
else that reads this stuff besides me.
There are true fan who are the people who go to conventions on a live and die situation
and fandom is a way of life and will sell whatever they can sell at the dealer's tables
if they can make enough money to get back and forth between the conventions and who
literally the convention society is their social life.
Then there are a whole scope of people in between.
There are what we call closet fans who are the people who read the books, who watch the
shows, who go to the movies but who have absolutely no idea that there's any kind of organization
out there whatsoever.
There are the slightly organized fans which are people who realize that there is organization
who maybe go to a con every now and then, who every now and then get a chance to meet
their favorite author but who really aren't that much into the convention scene.
It's just something that they like and every now and then they like to express the fact
that they enjoy it.
Then of course there are the professional fan which are people who through their professions
one way or the other have somehow gotten tied up with the science fiction or fantasy genre
and because they deal with it every day or part of every day and because they must like
it or they wouldn't deal with it to some extent, they're fan too.
A lot of the writers who write the stuff are actually fans who although they're professionals
and write the things, they like it.
If you like something then you're a fan of it by the strictest definition and it just depends
on the level of that definition.
Then of course there's always the subgenre that we try to ignore which is your space cadets.
We call them space cadets because these are the kitty type mentalities.
Fortunately most of them are children and unfortunately some of them aren't who think
fans are just a way to play shoot them up Buck Rogers with other people and have missed
the point of what fandom is about but they're a part of fandom too and you can't exclude them.
There are many other levels of fandom that have no name.
A person who just likes maybe one story or one aspect of fandom but they like that very much
and they maybe illustrate it or try to copy it or something like that.
They're a fan even though they may not realize it.
Good explanation of fandom.
Yeah that's another show to it's end.
Yeah, you used it a whole show.
And fan is the plural of fan.
Right, fan is the plural of fan.
Yeah.
Otherwise we'll ask about filking then.
Oh damn, we got to know about filksening.
I'm curious, yeah tell us about filksening, the fact that it exists and what is it?
Well basically like any other, when you take fandom as a microcosm of people and that this is their social life when they're at a convention
you have to deal with the fact that social life includes entertainment.
And if you're into science fiction and fantasy and you're doing something special like a convention
you don't want to go out and entertain yourself by going to the local bar or the local disco.
That's boring.
You want to do something that's uniquely fandom.
And so something that was developed through fandom is a thing called filksinging.
Filksinging is folksinging sort of.
Basically filksinging is a creation of songs that are performed by one person or many person on or off key.
It makes no difference.
That were written specifically for the audience of science fiction and fantasy listeners.
And there are a lot of sing along songs.
Some of them are very silly and very stupid but some of them are very serious and very beautiful.
And it's a form of entertainment strictly for science fiction and fantasy audiences.
You know you would never find them on the top ten unless all of a sudden the national fad happened to turn that direction.
But a very viable art form.
Now some of filksinging is very simple.
It simply involves taking a tune from a normal song and changing the words around to have something to do with science fiction or fantasy.
And usually those are funny and they're the kind that you can get a lot of giggles off and everyone joins in.
But the more serious element is original songs that deal with very serious ideas like the fact that man's finally reaching for space
and the Columbia's here or the fact that when are we really going to get to be dancing on the moon by the time it actually happens I'll be too old.
And things like that.
And filking is a whole type of folk singing strictly for fans.
And some fans don't like it because they don't like the taking of other people's music and putting other lyrics to it.
But for most fans it's a wonderful outlet for getting to know other people and just sit around at night when there's nothing else to do and sing songs
and get a very close type of camaraderie that you only get in some other kind of very close knit group.
Not all conventions have filksinging but the more intimate ones where it really is a social life type situation do.
Because it's a very big part of the social life.
Partying is a very big part of the social life too and that usually starts before and after the folk singing and is a whole separate thing altogether.
But partying is a part of everybody's social life no matter what they do.
Do you want to get back on the track now?
No, no those are good.
We're trying to do some more stuff on fandom because it is a big part of it.
And fandom because you were in it.
Remember what it was like before fandom?
Oh yes.
You know what there was such a thing?
Well 95 or greater percent of the population lives in that particular area.
Exactly, exactly.
You know science fiction fandom is different than being a football fan.
Oh much, oh much.
So these shows are probably pretty interesting.
There seems to be a bit of animosity, I don't know from the Trekkies versus the science fiction fans.
I've seen it at science fiction conventions where Trekkie is synonymous with Kadele Dahl or something.
Well actually you have to understand the history of that and I explain most of it.
Basically what happened is in the beginning before there was Star Trek, which Star Trek is not just a history of media thing,
you know a major phenomenon in media but it's also a main timeline, drawing line in the history of science fiction and fantasy fandom.
And before Trekk there was still fandom but it was almost exclusively literary fandom strictly oriented towards the writers and the things they wrote.
And very small groupings, you know conventions had maybe 200 people where nowadays it's not unusual to go to one with 8000.
And it was a very small informal group of writers and the people who liked what they wrote who were their fans.
Then Star Trek came along and all of a sudden a whole world of people who'd never occurred to them that such a thing as science fiction existed
were exposed to it and they were exposed to it in such a way where they discovered that they liked it because it was people caring about people
and it was exploring problems and situations that you can't explore in average everyday mundane life.
You know like for example to quote one of the episodes in one of the episodes a man is brought face to face with his evil half
and you have his good half and his evil half and he's forced to cope with the idea that they're both him.
And it's done in a very graphic way that you could never do in a non-science fiction story.
And so this caught a lot of people's imagination and a huge following grew up around the show.
And then they discovered conventions. They started out by making their own Star Trek convention which was nothing but Star Trek
and had none of the regular science fiction or fantasy with it.
And then they started sort of moving in on the regular conventions where they'd start showing up because they would discover that science fiction was there too
and they weren't just in love with Trek. It was just their first love and they discovered science fiction through it.
I'm one of these. I had read it before but I didn't really discover science fiction instilled until Star Trek
but I did not feel at this point that that makes me a Trekkie and I'll explain that in a minute.
But they started moving in on the other types of fandom and the grassroots of fandom looked at this influx of video junkies
and said, my God, these are the Trekkies, you know, and they treated them like a base level set because to them they were
because they didn't start with the original literature. They started from the hand-fed media of television.
Now since then that has died down for the most part because most Star Trek fans have just used that as a jumping board
into the literary levels of science fiction and fantasy and while they're still Star Trek fans, they still are very much in love with all the other areas as well
and therefore are not Trekkies and are not just going to die from Mr. Spock's ears or something.
But we still have a large influx of the people who haven't discovered the literary branch of the genre and only know the media branch
and it's still unfortunately largely looked down on by the people who are mostly into the literary branch.
But it is changing every day because Star Trek is after all 11 years old
and most of the people who were Trekkies have long ago changed where their influence is
and so for the most part that kind of Ru-Ha-Ha is gone except by the die-hard fans who still feel that if there's more than 200 people
and if you're not strictly there for the literature then you're not a true fan.
15 years old.
16 years old.
Wasn't it fall of 66?
66, yeah.
Yeah, we're getting old.
Yeah, yeah.
And I didn't discover it until the first reruns.
I was unfortunately a senior in high school when it started.
Yeah, I was too.
Or somewhere.
See, we've covered costuming and we've covered masquerade and we've covered different kinds of costuming at cons.
We've covered fandom, milk singing, what else?
Pardon?
Is there anything that does anything occur to you that might not be obvious?
Yeah, I got one.
Let's go back to costuming for a little bit.
Whenever you're putting a costume together, some of the accru-
Accru-termists?
Accru-termists, I think.
Accru-termists that you are wearing are not your standard Fred's clothing store items.
Where do you go about finding them?
Anywhere I can.
I love thrift stores.
Thrift stores are wonderful.
People turn junk into the thrift store that is some of the most beautiful brocades,
something that will pass for a Celtic pendant that somebody's great-great-grandmother wore,
and it's not in styles.
They throw it out and it's wonderful on a costume.
As a matter of fact, I started my jewelry collecting by going to thrift stores,
and started a lot of-
As a matter of fact, a lot of the costumes that I still use were gotten by going to a thrift store
discovering somebody had made a dress and thrown it away because it wasn't in style,
but it happened to be absolutely perfect for the year 1100.
And so I would buy it for 50 cents and put some trim on it and redo it so it was exactly right.
Take the zipper out and put lace in or ties to tie it up the back so it was proper.
And I had a costume for 50 cents plus the cost of the trim.
And there are places where you can get costume material.
A lot of stores, costume stores have things you can use, but for the most part,
it's just thrift stores, flea markets.
If you're into a particular era, for example, there's a lot of medievalists who are very much in the medieval era
for their fantasy costumes.
You can get medieval jewelry shipped in from Scotland and England.
As a matter of fact, when I have a dealer's table, I sell jewelry that is imported from Scotland and England
that is recreations of the actual old jewelry.
And the only place it would be popular is at conventions and medieval events,
but here because the people can't find it, I'm doing them a service by supplying it.
And there are other people who do the same sort of thing.
Fabric outlets are wonderful when you are looking for a particular look of fabric.
There are certain kinds of specialty stores that have certain special kinds of fabric design,
just for costuming that are wonderful places to haunt.
And just about every metropolitan area has one.
You just have to really search to find where it is.
Grodge sales are wonderful because the average non-fan mundane person,
when they have something that's maybe strictly oriented towards costume,
is not necessarily going to want to keep it around because they don't have anything they can do with it.
And so you can get some really nice costume pieces for 50 cents a dollar, maybe $2.
Johnny had to have a King Arthur outfit for the last play and it's all done
and they don't want it anymore so it's out on the rack for sale and things like that.
But a large part of it you have to create.
And there are all kinds of shortcuts for creating it.
I can make and have made on occasion, I've made armor for masquerade type costumes
out of cardboard and wrapping paper foil.
And on the stage you cannot tell that it is not really gold armor or silver armor or whatever.
Wood putty, if there's something that you want that you can't make like the Boris paintings
that are so well known, a lot of his characters wear jewelry that is impossible to really get created
out of metal but it looks wonderful so you can make it out of wood putty and spray paint it
or cover it with foil, it looks just like metal jewelry.
There's a lot of shortcuts you can take and it's a lot of fun because you can just open up your imagination
and let it run wild as far as, well let's see, this is the look I want, what can I use to make it out of?
Oh well, let's try paper mache.
Gee, that works.
Or wood putty again like I said, all kinds of glues and resins.
And of course you can go and use the things that they actually use in the studios and use things like latex
and plaster but it takes a bit of training to learn how to use those although those are the most effective ways
of making things that you can't buy.
Of course there are those of us who go around and make things for people who can't make them themselves
like if Johnny wants a cloak and he has no idea how to make the one, he can buy one from a person
such as me who goes around making them simply because there is no place you can walk into the store and buy one.
I mean there are no cloaks to fuzz and delts.
Yes, Neiman Marcus, $5,000.
That's about it, that's about it.